weight: 1

https://linux1st.com/1023-manage-shared-libraries.html

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1P58gW8xCkk

### Linking

- static - library part of the program
- dynamic - using libraries installed on the system, smaller program

directories

- `/lib` or `/lib64` - system wide
- `/usr/lib` - user libraries, installed by applications (e.g. MySQL)

#### ldd tool

- `ldd /bin/ls` - ldd tool shows which libraries the binary needs
- `ldd -u /usr/bin/git` - prints unused direct dependencies (if they exist)

example of dynamically linked libraries:

```
milan@ubuntu:/usr/lib$ ldd /bin/ls
	linux-vdso.so.1 (0x0000f26dbd594000)
	libselinux.so.1 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libselinux.so.1 (0x0000f26dbd4b0000)
	libcap.so.2 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libcap.so.2 (0x0000f26dbd480000)
	libc.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x0000f26dbd2b0000)
	/lib/ld-linux-aarch64.so.1 (0x0000f26dbd550000)
	libpcre2-8.so.0 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libpcre2-8.so.0 (0x0000f26dbd1f0000)
```

naming convention for dynamic libs
- `lib*.so*`  (`so` for Shared Object), e.g. `libpthread.so.0`

naming convention for static libs
-  `*.a` e.g. `libpthread.a`

#### Lib versions

- `my-library.so.1.8.2` -> a specific version installed on my system
- a binary requires `my-library.so.1` -> a link to `my-library.so.1.8.2`
- so when a lib gets updated (e.g. `.1.9.0`) the binary still can use it

real example:

```
root@ubuntu:/usr/lib# ls -la /usr/lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root 1788672 Mar 18 11:04 /usr/lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6

```

#### library cache

directories to look up for shared libraries:

```
root@ubuntu:~# cat /etc/ld.so.conf
include /etc/ld.so.conf.d/*.conf

```

Doing look up every time a binary runs would be slow. Here it comes `ldconfig` handy. It will create a cache with libraries in file `/etc/ld.so.cache`. Sudo needed.

`ldconfig -v` - verbose
`ldconfig -p` - print cache content
`ldconfig -vN` - verbose but do not rebuild cache

It is run by the programs. No need to run it manually.


#### search order

1. `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` - is what `PATH` for executables
2. Programs `PATH`
3. `/etc/ld.so.conf`
4. `/lib`, `/lib64`, `/usr/lib`, `/usr/lib64`




Guided Exercises

2. You have developed a piece of software and want to add a new shared library directory to your system (/opt/lib/mylib). You write its absolute path in a file called mylib.conf.

◦ In what directory should you put this file? => `/etc/ld.so.conf.d`
◦ What command should you run to make the changes fully effective? => `ldconfig`

3. What command would you use to list the shared libraries required by kill? => `ldd /usr/bin/kill`

Explorational Exercises

1. objdump is a command line utility that displays information from object files. Check if it is installed in your system with which objdump. If it is not, please, install it.

- Use objdump with the -p (or --private-headers) option and grep to print the dependencies of glibc: