_Weight: 3_

https://linux1st.com/1024-use-debian-package-management.html

#### Repositories

- each distribution has its own
- vary in size and content
- packages with `.deb` suffix in Debian based distros
- Debian packages are names like `NAME-VERSION-RELEASE_ARCHITECTURE.deb`; Say `tmux_3.2a-4build1_amd64.deb`.


#### Tools

`apt` (newer), `apt-get`, `dpkg`

`/etc/apt/sources.list.d/ubuntu.sources`


#### updating the system

`sudo apt-get update` - updates its cache from remote repository

cache in `/var/cache/apt`

adding a new source - to `/etc/apt/sources.list.d` - then run `apt-get update`

## install, remove, upgrade packages

- `apt-get install tmux` - installs `tmux` with 2 other dependencies
- `apt-get install -s vlc` - `s` for simulate
- `apt-get install --download-only vlc` - no install just download to local cache
- `apt-get --fix-broken install` - fix broken installed package
- `apt-get downloads tmux` - downloads the .deb package to current directory


- `apt-get remove tmux` - removes just `tmux` keeps the 2 dependencies 
- `apt-get autoremove` - removes all no longer needed packages
- `apt-get autoremove tmux` - removes just dependencies of the tmux

- `apt-cache search vlc 
- `apt search vlc`

- `apt install vlc` -> if a new version exists it will upgrade the existing one
- `apt upgrade` - upgrades system
- `apt dist-upgrade`

#### dpkg

- `dpkg` - lower level package manager
- `dpkg -i some.deb`
- does not resolve dependencies

## reconfigure packages

Based on `debconf` takes post install actions.

e.g. `sudo dpkg-reconfigure tzdata`


---


Guided Exercises

1. What is the command to install a package named package.deb using dpkg?
   
   `sudo dpkg -i package.deb`
    
2. Using dpkg-query, find which package contains a file named 7zr.1.gz.
   
   `dpkg-query -S 7zr.1.gz`
    
3. Can you remove a package called unzip from the system using dpkg -r unzip if the package file-roller depends on it? If not, what would be the correct way to do it?
    
4. Using apt-file, how can you find out which package contains the file unrar

`apt-file search /usr/bin/unrar`
    
5. Using apt-cache, what is the command to show information for the package gimp?

`apt-cache show gimp`


Explorational Exercises

1. Consider a repository with Debian source packages for the xenial distribution, hosted at http://us.archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu/ and with packages for the component. What would be the corresponding line to be added to ?
   
   `deb-src http://us.archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu/ xenial universe`
    
2. While compiling a program, you come across an error message complaining that the header file zzip-io.h is not present in your system. How can you find out which package provides that file?
   
   `apt-file search zzip-io.h`
    
3. How can you ignore a dependency warning and remove a package using dpkg, even if there are packages that depend on it in the system?
   
   `--force`
    
4. How can you get more information about a package called midori using apt?

`apt-cache show midori`
    
5. Before installing or updating packages with apt, which command should be used to ensure that the package index is up-to-date?
`apt-get update`
