Weight: 1

https://linux1st.com/1026-linux-as-a-virtualization-guest.html

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F3yl5Lx1htc

## Hypervisor

A layer between virtualized resources (CPU, RAM, Storage) and actual HW.

Commonly used hypervisors: Xen, KVM, VirtualBox

#### Hypervisor type 1 vs type2

Type 1 - "Native" or "Bare metal"

- Hypervisor runs directly on the HW (one layer less)
- examples: KVM (in linux kernel), Xen, Hyper-V
- does not need a host OS

Type 2 - "Hosted"

- e.g. running VM in VirtualBox (having role of hypervisor) on a host OS (my Mac OS)
- examples: VirtualBox, VMWare

The KVM is of both types (Type1 AND Type2).


### Types of Virtual Machines

#### Fully Virtualized

- A fully virtualized guest is one where the guest (or HardwareVM) is unaware that it is a running virtual machine instance.
- `Intel VT-x` or `AMD-V` CPU extensions must be enabled in firmware (BIOS/UEFI)

#### Paravirtualized

- the guest operating system is aware that it is a running virtual machine instance
- will make use of a modified kernel and special drivers (known as guest drivers)

#### Hybrid

- Paravirtualization and full virtualization can be combined

#### VM Create and Clone

- OVF (Open Virtualization Format) - allows to move VMs between Hypervisors
- OVA (Open Virtualization Archive) 
- also there are templates

#### Host specific configuration

- Hostname
- NIC MAC address
- Machine ID
- Storage UUID
- any other UUID in the system

##### The D-Bus Machine ID

Many Linux installations will utilize a machine identification number generated at install time, called the D-Bus machine ID. However, if a virtual machine is cloned to be used as a template for other virtual machine installations, a new D-Bus machine ID would need to be created to ensure that system resources from the hypervisor get directed to the appropriate guest system.

`cat /etc/machine-d`

#### Containers

Newer concept, also called OS level virtualization. Slimmer than full VMs. A container uses underlying OS.

Container technology is similar in some aspects to a virtual machine, where you get an isolated environment to easily deploy an application. Whereas with a virtual machine an entire computer is emulated, a container uses just enough software to run an application. In this way, there is far less overhead.

Docker, LXD/LXC, [systemd-nspawn](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Systemd-nspawn), OpenShift

##### cgroups

They use `control groups` better known as `cgroups` mechanism within the Linux kernel. The cgroup is a way to partition system resources such as memory, processor time as well as disk and network bandwidth for an individual application.

#### IaaS

Infrastructure as a Service. Cloud service providers - AWS, Google Cloud, MS Azure. Buying resources like electricity.

`cloud-init` - helps to set up a cloud machine. https://cloud-init.io/