_Weight: 4_

https://linux1st.com/1033-perform-basic-file-management.html

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lTnkGg9o6u0

## Wildcards and file globbing

- `*` - any string
- `?` - any single character
- `[ABC]` - matches A, B or  C
- `[a-k]` - matches a to k
- `[!x]` - not x

### Files
`cp`, `cp -i` - interactive, asking for approve
`mv`
`rm`

`rm -r /non-emtpty-directory` - deletes content of non-empty dir and than it deletes the dir itself

`touch fileA fileB`

### Directories

`mkdir`
`rmdir`
``
use `p` for parents 
`mkdir -p /tmp/level1/level2/level3`

delete folder with its content
`rm -rf /tmp/level1` - dangerous, always double check


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tSN1MSaFYEw

`touch` - change file timestamp

- if file does not exist - it creates one
- if file exists it updates the timestamp

`touch -t 202505251200.59 file`
`touch -d "5 Nov" file` or `touch -d yesterday 6am file` 

`touch -r source destination` - `r` for reference, copy timestamp from one file to another

`file` - determine file type

`file -i file` - gets MIME for a file

```
milan@jantar ~/Downloads $ file -i hyprlock_wallpaper.png
hyprlock_wallpaper.png: image/png; charset=binary
```

`dd` - convert and copy a file

`dd if=input-file of=output-file`

	`dd if=/dev/zero of=1MB-file count=1024 bs=1024` - produces 1MB file

`dd if=ubuntu.iso of=/dev/sdc bs=2048` - write iso file to a USB flash disk to make boot-able USB

`find` - search for files in a directory

`find ~ -type d` - search in my home but for directories only
 - `type f` - regular files
 - `type s` - symbolic links
 - `type d` - directories
 - `size +100k` - search for files larger than 100 kB

`-amin` - access minutes
`-cmin` - status change min
`-mmin` - modified minutes
`-atime` - access time in days
....

`find ~ -mmin -60 -exec echo rm '{}' \;`  - search for files modified in last 60 minutes and then execute a `echo rm` on each

`find ~ -iname "*text*"` - search for files with _text_ in the name

### Compressing and Archiving

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MLaCDTRgis

there is a difference in archiving vs compression

#### compressing

These works on one file.

`gzip` and `gunzip`

`gzip file` - compress it to file `file.gz`

`bzip2` and `bz2unzip`

`xz` and `unxz`

#### archiving

For many files - combines multiple files to one file.

`tar -cf myfiles.tar file1 file2 file3` (`cf` for create file)

`tar -xf myfiles.tar` - `x` for extract files

`tar -cfvz myfiles.tar.gz file1 file2 file3` (`z` for gzip) - creates archive and then it gzip it

`tar -xf my.tar file.txt` - extract only file `file.txt` from the archive

`cpio` - format of cpio archive files (legacy)

---
You need to create a tarball. Which tar command and options should you use?

`tar -czf`

- `c` - for _create_
- `f` - for _file_
- `z` - zip it


You need to extract files from a created tarball. Which tar command and options should you use, assuming gzip compression was used?

`tar -xzf`

- `x` - for eXtract
- `z` - for zip
- `f` for file

You need to view files from a created tar archive. Which tar command and options should you use?

`tar -tf`

- `t` (or `--list)` for list the tarball content
- `f` - for file

Which of the following commands creates a cpio archive?

`ls file? | cpio -ov > filearch.cpio`

switches:

- `-o` (or `--create`) - Copy-out
- `-i` (or `--extract`) - Copy-in
- `-v` - verbose

When you extract files from a cpio archive file or just view them, you are using what mode?

=>> `Copy-in`

btw. `cpoi` - stands for Copy-out/Copy-in

