_Weight: 2_

https://linux1st.com/1041-create-partitions-and-filesystems.html

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xSQdIIMGG2g

`MBR` vs `GPT`

terms:
- partition, partition type
- mbr, gpt
- block device

### Block devices

- non-volatile mass storage
- accessed by any order
- hard disk (HDD) or (SSD), USB flash disk, DVD


`MBR` 
- master boot record
- for BIOS (legacy)
- `fdisk` for partitioning

`GPT`
- GUID partition table
- for UEFI (new)
- `gdisk`  for partitioning

Physically connect a device (e.g. a new SSD) triggers `udev` which adds that device to `/dev` directory.

`parted`  - edits partition (not possible by fdisk)
`gparted`


part2

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQZVYtVOEhU

### Filesystem

Once a device is partitioned we need to format it with a filesystem.

Examples: fat32, ext4, swap, btrfs

terms:
- `journal` - prevents an issue when crash/power outage during write operation
- `uuid` - 

tools

- `mkfs` - build a Linux filesystem


### btrfs

truth statements

- It is a filesystem type.
- It has its own integrated RAID functionality.
- It can have subvolumes that are mounted separately from other subvolumes.
- It can have file-based transparent compression.

#### Experiment

todo

create a partition of a type Linux and try to format it as ntfs - what error if any it produces?

```
Disk /dev/sdb1: 4 GiB, 4294967296 bytes, 8388608 sectors
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: dos
Disk identifier: 0x00000000
```

```
milan@ubuntu:~$ sudo mkfs.ntfs /dev/sdb1 
Cluster size has been automatically set to 4096 bytes.
Initializing device with zeroes: 100% - Done.
Creating NTFS volume structures.
mkntfs completed successfully. Have a nice day.
```

Seems the `mkfs.ntfs` changes the type from Linux to `dos` when formatting.


Which of the following are ways by which you can identify a filesystem in the /etc/fstab file?

- device file name
- UUID
- label

In the /etc/fstab file, what are the options used for a record, when options is set to defaults?

- dev
- nouser
- rw