_Weight: 2_

https://linux1st.com/1061-install-and-configure-x11.html

### X Window System

- a software stack that is used to display text and graphics on a screen
- client-server architecture, network capable
- client could be a _window manager_ or a complete _desktop environment_ (KDE, GNOME)
- there might be one X server with multiple X clients connected in over a network
- on a typical desktop/laptop linux machine both X server and X client run on the same machine
- modular via extensions (e.g. `libXrandr` , `libXcursor` ...)


#### display manager

- provides a graphical login to a system
- launched after the boot, typically started by **systemd**, and starts an X server session for the authenticated user
- display name of a running X session is stored in `DISPLAY` environment variable


e.g. one display setup:
```
milan@jantar ~ $ echo $DISPLAY
:0
```

The output details the following:
1. The X server in use is on the local system, hence there is nothing printed to the left of the colon.
2. The current X server session is the first as indicated by the 0 immediately following the colon.
3. There is only one logical screen in use, so a screen number is not visible.

#### X Server Configuration

- main config file `/etc/X11/xorg.conf`
- user config files should be in `/etc/X11/xorg.conf.d` directory

The `xorg.conf` has so called sections, e.g. `InputDevice`, `Monitor`, `Device`, `Screen`.

To generate a permanent `/etc/X11/xorg.conf` run 
```
sudo Xorg -configure
```
- `xorg.conf.new` will be created in your current working directory.

### Wayland

- X11 is old, Wayland is newer but still under development
- no client-server but Wayland protocol
- _Wayland compositor_ <--> (Wayland protocol) <--> kernel



`WAYLAND_DISPLAY`

```
milan@jantar ~ $ echo $WAYLAND_DISPLAY
wayland-1
```

#### Guided Exercises

1. What command would you use to determine what Xorg extensions are available on a system?
   
   `xdpinfo`
   
2. You have just received a brand new 10-button mouse for your computer, however it will
require extra configuration in order to get all of the buttons to function properly. Without
modifying the rest of the X server configuration, what directory would you use to create a new
configuration file for this mouse, and what specific configuration section would be used in this
file?

`/etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/20-mouse.conf` with section `InputDevice` or `InputClass`

3. What component of a Linux installation is responsible for keeping an X server running?
   
   _Display Manager_ (also called login manager), examples GDM, XDM, KDM

4. What command line switch is used with the X command to create a new xorg.conf
configuration file?

`X -configure`


#### Explorational Exercises

1. What would the contents of the DISPLAY environment variable be on a system named lab01 using a single display configuration? Assume that the DISPLAY environment variable is being viewed in a terminal emulator on the third independent screen.

`lab01:0.2`

2. What command can be used to create a keyboard configuration file for use by the X Window System?
   
   `xkbcomp`
   
3. On a typical Linux installation a user can switch to a virtual terminal by pressing the Ctrl + Alt +F1 - F6 keys on a keyboard. You have been asked to set up a kiosk system with a graphical interface and need this feature disabled to prevent unauthorized tampering with the system. You decide to create a /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/10-kiosk.conf configuration file. Using a ServerFlags section (which is used to set global Xorg options on the server), what option would need to be specified? Review the xorg(1) man page to locate the option.
   
   https://linux.die.net/man/5/xorg.conf
```
**Option DontVTSwitch** _boolean_

This disallows the use of the **Ctrl+Alt+F**_n_ sequence (where F_n_ refers to one of the numbered function keys). That sequence is normally used to switch to another virtual terminal on operating systems that have this feature. When this option is enabled, that key sequence has no special meaning and is passed to clients. Default: off.
```
   
   