All providers has Kubernetes managed service. AKS in case of Azure.

Mischa's approach when learning/trying a new service is to create it through Azure Portal first. Only then create the Terraform (or other) code.


## Create Kubernetes cluster via Azure Portal

### NodePool

_System_ - Database operator, External Secrets operator (infrastructure of the cluster)

_User_ - User workflows

### Pricing tier

- _Free_ - management is free, but charged for VM, storage, and network usage
- _Standard_ - for mission-critical and production workloads
- _Premium_ - Standard with 2 years of support

Kubernetes version - `1.33.6` (default) vs homelab `1.33.3`:

```bash
> kubectl get nodes                                                                                                    NAME       STATUS                        ROLES                  AGE    VERSION
hpmini01   Ready                         control-plane,master   226d   v1.33.3+k3s1
hpmini02   Ready                         worker                 119d   v1.33.5+k3s1                                    hpmini03   NotReady,SchedulingDisabled   worker                 38d    v1.34.3+k3s1
```

### Authentication and Authorization

1. Local accounts with Kubernetes RBAC - anyone with `~/.kube/config` file has acces
2. MS Entra ID with Kubernetes RBAC - needs MS ID to access the cluster
3. MS Entra ID only Azure RBAC

### Network

- Enable Cilium dataplane policy engine
- DNS name prefix: manual


Created manually in EU-Poland. The autogenerated template file download to `mercury-workflows/phase-3-aks/template.zip` (on Mac)

- [x] check Connection in Devpod! (it modifies `~/.kube/config`)
      `az account set --subscription ab577f05-79c6-4633-b730-0293419a9171`
	  `az aks get-credentials --resource-group eks-manual --name eks-manual --overwrite-existing`
- [x] tear it down


---

# AKS with Terraform

- quick example on using Terraform with EKS https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/learn/quick-kubernetes-deploy-terraform?pivots=development-environment-azure-cli

## azurerm_kubernetes_cluster

- official Terraform AKS provider doc https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/azurerm/latest/docs/resources/kubernetes_cluster


`identity`

- EKS must assign an identity to a cluster
- (cluster needs to reach a DB or other services - for that we need an identity)

- `identity` - required node, either _UserAssigned_ or _SystemAssigned_

### After apply

 - in AKS we don't see the Control Plane at all - only nodes from the Node pool
 - the Control Plan node is managed by Azure

---

# Exercise - Deploy n8n

1. prerequisite - deploy the cluster itself using `/phase3-aks/main.tf`
2. (my final version) `/phase3-aks/manifests-v3-my`

Deploy n8n to your Kubernetes cluster using the following documentation:

[https://docs.n8n.io/hosting/](https://docs.n8n.io/hosting/ "https://docs.n8n.io/hosting/")

### Workflows tips:

1. start with `kustomization.yaml` (to be used later with FluxCD)
2. add one by one resource files, start with `namespace.yaml`
3. apply manually


---
# Deploying n8n

```bash
# outputs manifest to be applied
# to verify it's working
kubectl kustomize


# apply kustomization file (from current dir)
kubectl apply -k .


# delete
kubectl delete -k .
```
### Storage classes in EKS

```bash
kubectl get sc
...
```

azurefile (Samba share)
azurefile-csi
azurefile-csi-premium
default
managed
managed-csi
managed-csi-premium
managed-premium


https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/aws-professional/eks-to-aks/storage#storage-classes

To see it in Azure Portal go to Subscriptions - Resource groups. There is one (autocreated) in my case its `MC_rg-cloud-course-aks_mercury-cluster_northeurope`. In there is the underlying infrastructure running the cluster. Including storage/disk.



### hickups

#### could not apply

```bash
kubectl apply -k .
error: error validating ".": error validating data: failed to download openapi: Get "https://mercury-x7timxzk.hcp.northeurope.azmk8s.io:443/openapi/v2?timeout=32s": dial tcp: lookup mercury-x7timxzk.hcp.northeurope.azmk8s.io on 172.17.0.1:53: no such
```

-> missing cluster credentials (in Azure Portal - "Connect" to cluster)

```bash
az account set --subscription ab577f05-79c6-4633-b730-0293419a9171
az aks get-credentials --resource-group rg-cloud-course-aks --name mercury-cluster --overwrite-existing
```

#### pod with n8n created in `default` namespace

the kustomizatioan.yaml

```
---
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization
resources:
  - namespace.yaml
  - storage.yaml
  - configmap.yaml
  - deployment.yaml
```

the deployment.yaml was missing `namespace: n8n` !

```yaml

```