https://linux1st.com/1013-change-runlevels-boot-targets-and-shutdown-or-reboot-the-system.html

weight: 3

pt1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1mOKv5LsPsw

- SysV - concept of run levels
- systemd - concept of boot targets

## systemd

what is the default target? 

```
root@vbox:/home/milan# systemctl get-default 
graphical.target
```

---

pt2 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C7kr7fZtWqs

### Stopping the system

- `shutdown` and others just links to `systemctl` (on systemd systems)
- can broadcast to all logged in users via `wall`

When shutdown is planned a file `nologin` is created and no new connections are accepted.

#### ACPI

Advanced Configuration and Power Interface

---
Question 180:

Which of the following SysVinit runlevels were for systems that needed network services started, and a Graphical User Interface provided?

Answer 180: runlevel 2 and runlevel 5


Question 181:

Which of the following SysVinit runlevels were for systems that needed network services started, but not a Graphical User Interface provided?

Answer 181: runlevel 3

---

LPIC-1 Learning Material


Linux has a monolitic kernel. Individual processes control a distinct functions. The processes are also called daemons. The very first process started by kernel is init process with PID 1. These are called system managers (SysV, systemd, Upstart)

### SysVinit

- predefined sets of states called _runlevels_
- program responsbile for managing runlevels - `/sbin/init`

Runlevel 0 - System shutdown
Runlevel 1 (also `s` or `single`) - Single user mode, WITHOUT network (maintenance mode)
Runlevel 2, 3 or 4 - Multiuser mode, users can login by console OR NETWORK, 2 and 4 not often used
Runlevel 5 - Multiuser mode. Same as 3, plus graphical mode login
Runlevel 6 - System restart.

`runlevel` command print 2 commands - first is the previous runlevel (N) the second is current runlevel.

```
$ runlevel

N 3
```


`telinit` - Change SysV runlevel

`telinit 1`, `telinit s` or `telinit S` - all will switch to runlevel 1

### systemd

- the most widely used system to manage system resources and services
- service are called `units` by systemd
- 

```
Table 1. Mapping between runlevels and systemd targets
       ┌──────────┬───────────────────┐
       │ Runlevel │ Target            │
       ├──────────┼───────────────────┤
       │ 0        │ poweroff.target   │
       ├──────────┼───────────────────┤
       │ 1        │ rescue.target     │
       ├──────────┼───────────────────┤
       │ 2, 3, 4  │ multi-user.target │
       ├──────────┼───────────────────┤
       │ 5        │ graphical.target  │
       ├──────────┼───────────────────┤
       │ 6        │ reboot.target     │
       └──────────┴───────────────────┘

```

There are 7 types of units:

1. service
2. socket
3. device
4. mount
5. automount
6. target - grouping of other units, managed as a single unit
7. snapshot - saved state of the systemd manager

`systemctl` - actions are `start`, `stop`, `restart`, `status`, `is-active`, `enable`, `disable`, `is-enabled`, `isolate`

`systemctl isolate multi-user.target` ~ `telnit 3`

The configuration files associated with every unit can be found in the `/lib/systemd/system/` directory.

```bash
milan@ubuntu:/lib/systemd/system$ ls -la | grep ssh
-rw-r--r--  1 root root   184 Jul 30  2024 rescue-ssh.target
-rw-r--r--  1 root root   417 Mar  6 14:38 ssh-access.target
drwxr-xr-x  2 root root  4096 Jun  9 10:06 sshd-keygen@.service.d
lrwxrwxrwx  1 root root    11 Apr 11 11:33 sshd.service -> ssh.service
-rw-r--r--  1 root root   341 Oct 30  2024 sshd@.service
-rw-r--r--  1 root root   561 Oct 30  2024 ssh.service
-rw-r--r--  1 root root   296 Nov 13  2024 ssh.socket
-rw-r--r--  1 root root   493 Mar 24 12:38 sssd-ssh.service
-rw-r--r--  1 root root   362 Mar 24 12:38 sssd-ssh.socket
```

#### Shutdown and Restart

`shutdown|poweroff|halt` command or `systemctl reboot|poweroff`

`wall` - write a message to all users

